welcome uh and thank you everyone for
joining us
uh this is the third installment uh of
our covid
19 vaccine series and i think there will
be um
additional installments uh as we move
through this pandemic
previously we explored the origins and
mechanisms
behind the novel mrna vaccines we
debated how
we can possibly ensure ethical and
equitable
access to these and other vaccines
both of these previous recordings are
available on the nicest
website if you want to revisit them and
i would encourage you to do so if you
haven't seen them
we're also putting the links in the chat
so today we have a
really extraordinary group with us to
engage
in the discussion that is top of mind
for everyone these days
how we actually end this pandemic
and the role of these new vaccines
there's a lot of ground to cover tonight
but i'm sure that we're going to be able
to at least touch on
what makes this horrific pendant
pandemic unique
and uniquely challenging and what the
current status of the vaccine
rollout is uh in the u.s and around the
world
and how we are in fact uh prioritizing
access
and really the nuts and bolts of how to
operationalize
um getting the world's population uh
back to normal so i'm delighted to uh to
welcome our three panelists uh we have
full bios and additional resources
on the naisif website so in brief
summary uh let me introduce
dr siddhartha mukherjee
sid is a pulitzer prize-winning
physician scientist
at columbia a cancer physician who also
trained as a virologist
he's a member of governor cuomo's
reimagined new york commission
to build back better and now i'm
delighted to say a member of the nicest
board
so welcome sid thank you and i'd also
like to
uh introduce dr wafa elsader
a global health expert a macarthur
foundation fellow
a professor of epidemiology in medicine
and director of
of icap at columbia at the mailman
school
and and really actually the author
today of uh of a must-read um
op-ed uh in the times um that deals with
this very
uh very topic um and i'm also delighted
to introduce gareth rhodes
gareth is the deputy superintendent and
special counsel
at the new york state department of
financial services
and a key member of the new york state
covid response task force and gareth
has been heavily involved in the vaccine
logistics in new york
in in testing and is going to be able to
really discuss all aspects of what it
means
to to actually do an extraordinary
rollout
um in in this uh
very very difficult uh circumstance and
what the next year might look like as we
as we pull ourselves out of this uh
pandemic
so thank you everyone for um for joining
and uh
and sharing your time with us i'm really
grateful
um and uh perhaps um waffa could
could you start with sharing what it is
about covid19 and the response
that has made this the worst pandemic
we've seen in our
in our lifetime sure
i can thank you very much for the
opportunity uh to speak with you tonight
and um yes i think there are a couple of
i would say early lessons learned as to
why uh this pandemic has reached the
dimensions it has reached and also why
in many ways uh the response has been
sub-optimal
and there's no doubt that the response
has been very choppy and sub-optimal
i think one is that unfortunately we did
not
learn the lessons of the past and did
we were not ready or uh to
respond to what many of us knew would
inevitably come along which is another
pandemic caused by probably most likely
a virus
so that's number one so we had
essentially dismantled uh
some of the um structures and the
workforce that
has traditionally been very involved in
terms of trying to
predict these epidemics as well as also
try to respond to such epidemics
i think another aspect has been the um
long-standing for decades now really
underfunding and
almost deterioration of we've let our
public health systems really
uh wither over the past decades uh lack
of investments in public health
uh for a very simple reason that people
often don't really
appreciate what public health does a
public health does prevention and nobody
appreciates prevention there's much more
of a sense of appreciation for
health care in general rather than
public health and the
the the difficult tasks of public health
in terms of
surveillance and data and also in terms
of contact tracing
and and many many other aspects of uh
that are critical to the response
and then i think also at the same time
there's been a
huge um gaps in
our capabilities to implement a variety
of different interventions whether it be
in testing or
now the rollout of the vaccine we've hit
bumpy we've had a
very bumpy road in terms of being able
to put together
the step-by-step by step-by-step
approach
to how do you go from taking an
innovation
all the way into implementation and
scale up and
and i think we have had a lot of
lessons learned along the way uh in
terms of the need for
much more detailed and deep
planning and a step-by-step really
detailed planning and dry runs and
making sure that every step of the way
will go smoothly
and that unfortunately again we have not
done that very effectively uh for a
variety of reasons and lastly is i think
also
it's been we've had a challenge in terms
of communications
engaging communities and gaining the
trust of
the most deeply affected communities uh
regarding covet 19
and also regarding the vaccine so both
the
the the depletion of the resources and
the workforce as well as
systems uh the weaknesses in our
logistical and operation system and
lastly
uh some of the missteps in terms of
communication and engagement of
communities all of these together
have created the crisis we're in today
so um so sid uh in your view
i mean we're sitting in the middle of
this uh of this big mess that everybody
is kind of scrambling
um to to respond to we do have
we do have some bright lights i mean we
do have um
you know the first two vaccines are are
pretty fabulous i think better than uh
certainly
uh the expectations of the companies
themselves
um but actually the last mile
getting those vaccines into people and
making sure we have
enough uh you know we now
fortunately are going to have an
incoming administration that believes in
science that is
committed to it appears public health um
how do we how do we get from where we
are
to where we need to be so
again thank you um i was
very um uh moved and
uh uh provoked by
dr el salder's piece in the new york
times
this week um and i would encourage
everyone to read it
um a vaccine is
a drug it's useless uh vaccination
is a process and it's useful um
a going from a vaccine to vaccination
is what we need to do we have vaccines
now available
we need to vaccinate people a vaccine
sitting in the freezer
is a useless uh a vial a vaccination in
a human
being is a useful thing um
let's talk a little bit about that
transition um
first of all we don't have enough and we
don't have enough because
of lots of reasons but one of the
reasons is that we didn't
invest in the infrastructure
that that is required as a nation we
didn't invest in the infrastructure
that's required to produce these
vaccines
um at a level 200 300 million people
and potentially as dr sauer pointed out
um
in in the case of um in the case of
drugs for hiv
uh potentially for the world um
we we did not invest and now we are
scrambling backwards to invest
in the infrastructure to produce um
the vaccine the vaccines themselves so
there is a production
limitation which is the first step so we
need to solve that limitation
and part of the vaccine task force that
comes into the administration
you will have to address how to overcome
those production limitations
that might range from using presidential
powers
including vaccine task force powers
to enable moderna and pfizer and
potentially johnson johnson
and astrazeneca remember the first two
are approved
under you eua the second two are in
in submission or have not finished their
phase three trials
um to be able to produce enough vaccines
that's step one
step two is the logistics so that is
being controlled
at a federal level um and we can talk
through all the logistics of all of that
step two is the movement of the
vaccine once it's been produced in the
factory
to the delivery sites now
because we are a federal system
and there are problems and advantages of
the federal system i'll talk about both
of them
the movement of the vaccine to the
states has been delegated to currently
operation warp speed for the most part
which is the federal aspect of the
system
and has is being controlled by
subcontractors of the federal system to
move the vaccine to the
various sites um thus far
um we've been analyzing this i've been
analyzing this
thus far that does not seem to be the
bottleneck
um we've been able to move the vaccine
those these are tough vaccines to move
um but you know fires it has to be
stored at minus 80 degrees
modern at -20 degrees and then
subsequently at freezer temperature
or fridge temperature but nonetheless
these are not easy vaccines
both of them require double doses we'll
come back to that in a second
so so that's step two and that is still
a federal
responsibility step three is the most
complex
step three is a state responsibility
once the vaccine arrives
at your local what i call local hospital
doc dock or at your walgreens
or wherever it might arrive it is now
the responsibility of the county and the
state
to dispense of the vaccine as it arrives
if we had full capacity
in other words if we had no limitations
on the number of vaccines available
we would do what would what was done
during the smallpox pandemic
or other pandemics that have been in the
past which is we would say
come one come all here's a kiosk on in
chelsea
here's a kiosk in in chicago um
here's the kiosk wherever it is come one
come all
come and get the vaccine and you're done
but the realities of these two vaccines
that have been currently approved
in under the eua process are the
following number one
is that there are limitations in terms
of the
total number available so that's one
limitation
and number two is that there is a for
the first vaccination
a 15 minute observation period that you
need to go through
to ensure that you don't have an
anaphylactic or allergic reaction
to the first vaccine 30 minutes if
you've had a prior
vaccine allergy that's for the first
dose
and number two of course we don't have
enough
so therefore in under those two
circumstances
the vaccination does becomes now no
longer a
two-minute job but it becomes at least a
15-minute
plus another 20-minute job right because
you're
screening and making sure that people
are getting the right vaccine at the
right time
so it now becomes a 40-minute job as
opposed to a three-minute job and you
can imagine that
is a tenfold uh change in the
total amount of time that a person has
to wait or
has to be vaccinated and number two is
that we don't have enough
so therefore comes the question of
rationing
and figuring out who needs to be
rationed and who doesn't need to be
rationed
and the last point i'll make here is
that that puts us in a very
positions like me puts us in a very
difficult position because we may need
to make decisions
not just about the logistics of you know
how many vaccines are being produced
federal decision how many vaccines are
being moved federal decisions
but how the states will ration the
amount of vaccine of the number of
vaccines
and ration the number of of slots
for vaccination that are available over
time
state decision and that has been
already it's been now seven to ten days
it has already been an enormous problem
and that
is that is the problem that we're trying
to address should we vaccinate people
over 65 first
should we vaccinate healthcare workers
frontline workers even before that
what about firefighters what about
policemen what about teachers
what about any of these all any of these
oil
categories if we had infinite supply
this would this problem would go away
but we don't have infinite supply
and we have infinite demand and that's
the problem
well in a certain way which which
we'll get into we have
something a little less than infinite
demand right because we do have the
problem
where even at the major uh medical
centers we do have people who are
declining
vaccination for whatever reason not just
because
uh you know in the case of uh of a woman
who is pregnant or trying to become
pregnant where the data is
uh you know is not definitive yet uh oh
look i will certainly come back to that
yes
but uh but it but it definitely is an
issue
um so uh so gareth um here you are
it's not um for you it's not at all uh
hypothetical
um you are you are charged with um with
trying to actually
uh get these um these uh vaccine
uh stations uh set up with trying to get
um the trying to adhere to to whatever
the
the thoughts are on a particular day
because it does seem to change
uh daily or every few days of how we're
going to prioritize
so you have been sitting in the hot seat
uh of that
and uh why don't you why don't you talk
about that from um from your vantage
point
great and thank you susan and thank you
to the new york stem cell foundation
for for having us and hosting us this
tonight
it's a consideration i think some very
you know good points about the
logistical challenges that are facing
states and localities around the country
i think
a month ago today number 14 was the
first
uh dose administered in the nation here
in new york um at a hospital in queens
if you think back to where we were on
that day the cdc had just come out with
their recommendations on who should
receive the vaccine first a very small
narrow group of people which the acip
acip recommended healthcare you know
frontline healthcare workers
residents and and staff of long-term
care facilities
new york state that's about a population
about 2.1 million we received about 170
doses in week one slowly ramping up
after that the conversation if you
remember back
kind of when that was beginning was
really that strict priority is it going
to be
icu and emergency department before
others who maybe aren't quite as much on
the front line
a conversation shifted properly and
rightfully so
over a period of weeks from why are
there still doses
in inventory when they could be going
into arms so we went from
on december 14th here just here in new
york 2.1 million people eligible
to today over 7 million people
eligible and that's not even including
yet the recommendations that were made
this just this past
week about adults under 65
with underlying health conditions you're
talking uh if you look at the state
population
uh under who is 16 and older it's
50 it's 15 it's 15 million people so we
currently have 7.1 million people
eligible at a 15 million
and that in a in in that time period
we only received one million doses uh
for
first doses of which we have
administered
approximately 700 we've received 1.1
million of what we've
administered approximate approximately
700 000
including the long-term care the
facility program which the federal
government is running
so you look at just the allocations that
new york state has under its control
we've received by 850 000 administered
about 600 000.
it's about a 72 administration rate and
you've seen
dramatic uh uptick in terms of
throughput from beginning
in week one to some of these statistics
this week one we administered about
thirty four
thousand shots week two ninety eight
thousand week three a hundred and forty
three thousand just last week
three hundred thousand last week more
shots administered than came in the door
and we're well on our way to beating
that this week so i think you've seen
this the different chapters of the
vaccine rollout from this strict
strict prioritization to really the
the focus on on throughput getting shots
and arms right where it should be
how do we empty this clear the shelves
at the end of every single week
and with that you sacrifice you know
you're not gonna you're gonna have and
we get calls all the time from people
who are in that
very first category saying now we can't
get an appointment or it's harder to get
a dose
uh but we are really seeing these these
shots go off the shelf
um in a way i'm sure we all saw this
week the java center opening
many local health departments are
opening mass vaccination sites and
there are some certainly some logistical
and operational
um hurdles to this you know schedule
when you open up to 7.1 million people
and need to schedule all those people
and everyone's calling at once
it's uh these are certainly large
challenges on a public health
infrastructure
that has been uh severely taxed to say
the least
over the last over the last months so
i think what we're what we're looking at
is
between 200 and 300 000 doses coming
into new york a week right now with an
eligible population of seven million
with uh 700 000 administered so far
at this pace we're looking at six months
really until even that group
even taking into account hesitancy and
other factors so
it's uh but again this is the
the this is a their their patience is
what we've been asking
new yorkers for is and and but it's been
really
to me for someone who uh
i remember in late march setting up the
jab at center as as the temporary
hospital and seeing the comfort come up
the
hudson river there and just now seeing
those shots and arms
was an emotional day just to seeing how
that transformation has happened and
really at least for me a real
i know for many of us a sign of hope for
what's ahead
you know one of one of the things i um i
i found
um very disturbing which i gather is now
changing is
um there was there was such a concern
initially from
making sure that only those in the
categories were vaccinated
yet the human behavior and actually the
vaccine
the vaccines themselves because uh
moderna has a
lifespan of six hours after it's uh
after it's been thawed i
i don't recall exactly what the pfizer
is um but
uh you know pharmacists or uh
you know or um uh facilities really
you know terrified they didn't want to
um incur penalties or lose their license
but you know
they're deciding between you know
grabbing somebody a hu
you know a human being and vaccinating
them right better than
throwing it out or what some of them
ended up doing which was throwing it out
which is
just to me um criminal and when i look
at some of the categories that haven't
um yet been put into play but there are
people
under 65 who have particular conditions
you know there again uh you know for
example even in diabetes
for some reason type 1 diabetes seems to
have been prioritized lower than type 2
when in fact it has a higher risk i mean
it's kind of the
you know the the perfect being the enemy
of the of the good with all of this
slicing and dicing doesn't really um
correlate with with human behavior
because people don't come
you know sort of in in sets of 10
right which is the the doses in a modern
vial
or whatever it turned out to be and you
know sort of arm-in-arm saying let's get
vaccinated
they show up or things happen in their
life and they cancel or they're late
and you know you've got people you know
waiting um
just desperate to to figure out how are
we going to use
the supply so i think the i i'm
i'm very pleased that the um the
regulations were
were eased a bit and i hope that the
messaging is um
uh is really a goal but in fact at the
end of the day
just let's not waste the uh you know
this really precious
uh material um uh waffle what's your
uh no i think it's a very good point
susan i think it's it's interesting
to reflect that um i mean there is
really
or there certainly the us and and i
can't think of other countries that have
had
a successful adult vaccination programs
i mean i think
countries like the united states and
many countries around the world actually
have done
pretty well in terms of childhood
vaccination
and largely because you're required to
have your child vaccinated to go to
school
but for adult vaccination we don't have
a good track record we don't have the
systems to have done
adult vaccination every year maybe 50
percent of people who need the flu
vaccine actually receive it
so so we don't have a systematic way we
don't have the
the playbook by which we can massively
uh
vaccinate adults in this country and i
think that's part of the problem it's
kind of a new
it's new for everybody the other issue
is
is the different priority groups and
that has been
quite a challenge because obviously they
that adds complexity and then you have
to
require people to show evidence or
eligibility i mean somebody coming in
they say
do they have to get a doctor's note that
says they have diabetes do they have to
it adds complexity to already a very
complex process
which is an emotional process and it's
and
an emotional process and scary process
and and i think in many ways
the the whole idea of trying to have
these priority groups so based on very
good
intentions and the intentions were uh to
preserve
equity which is really important that
those who are
uh may have been most severely impacted
by this epidemic should be at the front
of the line and
also to try to prevent disease and death
and that's going to populations that
have are at high risk and they have a
high risk of mortality and morbidity so
the principles are very solid
in terms of actually what drove the
prioritization
the problem is that real reality
clashed with the principles and it
became
clear that it is while these are really
very great motivations for doing it
right
um it's it just is very hard to deliver
on this
and i think in many ways i feel
that maybe another approach might be at
this point in time
i want to preserve equity because i it's
something i deeply believe in
but maybe what we can do is try to get
at equity by where we situate
vaccination centers yeah uh
where we have them based and then you
can maybe have
you know a decreasing kind of uh age
bands
uh that would go down different age
bands and get at equity through where
geography led geography guide equity or
not just geography but maybe even
different workforce like set up
something
at the bus depot down the street so
i'm thinking that it might be that um
what is the
the perfect can be the enemy of some
mistakes
perfect sometimes can be the enemy of
the good is maybe
now you know we we maybe these kinds of
imperatives are forcing us to revisit
some of these very very important and
lofty principles that guided this
prioritization scheme
um you've been involved in setting up
a mass vaccination i have and i can
talk to you about the challenges about
that in a second
um so one of the uh setups that that
i've been involved in has been the
disneyland super pod
um and it's been i have to say an
incredible challenge
um challenges that we have not even
observed before
i'll talk about some of them but first
of all let me echo wafa's thoughts
i'm going to talk about i'm going to
take everyone everyone is a doctor so
i'm going to
use everyone's first names i'm sorry um
so um uh i think that's
it's incredibly important the first
thing that was very important
was to get the front line workers
vaccinated
there is i think no one debates that
because they were in the front lines
nurses physicians um
people who cleaned the rooms people who
were in the hospitals there was there is
i would say that uh there is
virtually no doubt i had a conversation
with peter singer
and julia kayam and others in the new
york times magazine
you're welcome to look at that no one
challenges the idea that uh these
frontline workers need to be vaccinated
first
that's the easy part then comes the hard
part which is
how do we get to the the
disproportionality
[Music]
of deaths among african-americans
latin x and other communities
which have suffered disproportional
amounts of death
i think one solution is to increase
vaccination what i would call as rafa
might have described it
vaccination visibility which is
your neighborhood kiosk not walgreens
necessarily but a neighborhood kiosk
should have a vaccination site clear
information available in all languages
particularly languages that are
local and have those vaccines available
should you desire to have a vaccine
because they have been
disproportionately affected
that would be one thing um
i will come back to the the disneyland
part in one second
but the last thing i want to mention and
this is a a credit to some extent to
gareth and others there's been a lot of
news about vaccine wastage
and a lot of news about people giving
inappropriate vaccinations etc
in fact if you look at the numbers
they're actually quite small yes
the u.s has not waste so far we haven't
wasted a lot of vaccine
and the number of uh i would say
criminal acts or turn
acts of vaccination although they have
been reported in the newspapers and are
real
i'm not debating them are relatively
small
um we have largely followed protocol
and are largely following protocol and
we have to because we don't have enough
if there was an infinite supply we could
unleash it
that is not an infinite supply all right
now let me speak a little bit about our
experience in the disneyland pod because
we are vaccinating
10 000 people per day which it's the
largest
one of the two largest pods available
the problem with this vaccine as it is
right now
is that it requires two shots and
it requires a 15 minute post
vaccination observation period that is
unlike the flu vaccination it's unlike
nmr it's unlike tdt
and other vaccines that children get you
know if you get mmr you go get a jab in
your
pediatrician's office you leave and
you're done
this requires as far as we can tell a
pre-registration to make sure that
you're eligible because of the vaccine
limitations
um consent of course there's always
consent followed by
a vaccination itself followed by a
15-minute observation period
in which you make sure that you don't
get an anaphylactic shock
that is then followed moderna
28 days 5's are 21 days a booster shot
for which you have to come back for um
presumably at the same site and then get
a booster shot so you don't
you don't mix moderna with pfizer fizer
with moderna
and as new vaccines come online
astrazeneca johnson and johnson
you don't mix one with the other so
these present
enormous logistic challenges gareth
knows about knows about all of them
because
their office has been handling these
logistic challenges
what we have what we proposed in the
super pod in disneyland
is at least get your first shot
at least get the first shot
and then get the first shot once you get
your first shot
you can get your second shot at your
local walgreens
you could get your second shot at your
local uh kiosk
but at least let's get things moving
because we have
four hundred thousand five hundred
thousand vaccines
allocated to california and of which
twenty thousand forty thousand etcetera
are in orange county where disneyland is
so um my suggestion is
to move like israel has done
which is to say take all the vaccines
that are available
distribute them according to state
populations
and then as fast as possible use
technology we are living in the 21st
century
use technology because this is a very
special vaccine two doses
15 minutes all of this stuff some
clinical uh
pre-assessment use the technologies that
we've made available
including the internet and digital
technologies
iphones etc so that we can distribute
the vaccine
equitably but also quickly because every
day
is a day that we lose
4 000 people 3 000 people to the virus
number one
and and the second thing i want to talk
about not in this immediate moment when
we come back
is that every day not only are we losing
two thousand or four thousand people
there are new viral variants that are
coming up that are worrisome
um and if they're if they're vaccine
resistant
um and if we don't decrease the
so-called r0
or the infection ability of the virus
we will be in a losing game behind the
virus the last thing i'm going to say
susan and i'm going to stop
is that um there are many vaccine
pessimists
and there are many people who are
who who you know have raised doubts
about our capacity to vaccinate
given the pace of infection
if we do a good job with vaccination
and that's a big if in other words if we
can vaccinate
100 to 150 million people by
you know in the on the order of um
let's say 25 million per month um
26 million or 30 million per month
we could potentially see the end of this
by april or
or may um that will be an enormous
success um if we don't do it properly
we we stretch out into the next summer
potentially into the winter
well i'm going to i'm going to stay with
the optimistic front
and i want to i want to congratulate
gareth and the governor on on getting
these mega centers
set up in new york levitt center jones
beach
suny albany i know the ball fields are
coming
soon both the yankees and the mets
what is the capacity of of those centers
assuming we had
all of the vaccine that we needed how
many people
could we in fact vaccinate
your state we could the javits center
alone we think we could do
uh 25 000 people a day over if we ran it
24 7 which would take up
about you know 175 000 uh
doses just for the javits center alone
which is in some weeks is larger than
the entire amount we've received outside
of the long-term care facility federal
program so
it is there's enormous i think the
conversation as it shifted
over the last month from kind of this
very strict uh eligibility criteria
you know making sure the right people
are going for i think it's gonna shift
in the next weeks when you start having
states who have
used up 100 of their inventory is going
to shift toward
um really more of a scheduling operation
of how do you
i think people you know i have people
who who are in
my families i know who are eligible who
say you know i i'm i'm i know i'm not
going to get it until
march but at least the fact that i have
march 11th at
4 00 p.m at the suny albany
drive-through locked in
that gives me at least uh you know i i i
reason i hope the problem is going to be
if you have then a large influx of
supply
that above what we're expecting all
these people want to of course um
reschedule their appointments so it but
you're gonna you you look at some of
these county health departments and some
of these mass science you can
as you know as as said was outlining
what's happening
in disney i mean you can really drive
massive throughput but it has to be
you know as as waffle said as well you
have to
also this approach where you're in the
communities where you're seeing
hesitancy rates we're seeing
where many of the frontline workers live
and and and
who aren't getting vaccinated i think
this is where you need to have
even if it's not massive throughput at a
in public housing or massive throughput
at churches or community centers or or
federally qualified health centers in
some of these rural communities even if
you're not seeing thousands a week a
couple hundred a week there
has an enormous impact on in the
community
so what do you see um uh uh
what is the gap between the
amounts that and i'll just i'll just
stick to new york
um that new york is receiving and
what it would be possible to to receive
from the currently approved uh
manufacturers
do they have more uh more doses that
could be delivered
well they're holding the second dose so
we have not received
any second doses outside of
the outside of the administrative uh
period
so they have our we received the last
week
exactly the same number of doses for
second shots that we received
in week one december 14th to the 21st so
that is
they are sending this doesn't come from
pfizer and moderna
to a state warehouse and then we divide
it up it goes directly from pfizer and
moderna
to the provider so there's no we
allocate it we there's a
federal database called tiberius that we
go in and we say here's
where here's all the different sites
around the state that are going to get
how much vaccine
it ships directly to the to them using
those federal contractors and
subcontractors that city was describing
and so that they get exactly the same
amount those same sites
automatically three weeks later for
pfizer and 28 days later
for for modernist we had no we don't
even play a
a role in that it just happens
automatically what we have issued
guidance on and
directed providers to do is make sure
when someone
is either scheduling their first
appointment or getting their first dose
you're scheduling them for their second
dose and we have a the
everyone in the state every single
vaccination dose
has to be reported to our centralized
system with an email address a phone
number we have a system where people are
texted a reminder
about their second dose and email and if
they don't get it a follow-up system so
we're using these different technologies
to try to you know make sure people do
come back for their for their second
dose big debate
susan um this is a big debate in the
epidemic epidemiology community
um and wifi and gareth please weigh in
whether we should release the first
doses um
on on mass even without waiting
and sequestering or keeping back the
second doses
remember that the there are two pieces
of data that are relevant here
one piece of data is that the clinical
trials for moderna and pfizer were
performed with a two dose regimen
right a first dose and a booster regimen
and
um i'm a frontline medical worker so
i received the first dose and i'm
scheduled to get the next dose next week
that had that was the nature of the
clinical trial
but thankfully because of a lot of us
who um were on the boards of various
uh clinical trial adjudication
committees
we also asked both pfizer and returner
to estimate
not estimate to to actualize
the level of protection given by the
first dose itself
that data is available um you can look
it up in
the new england journal of medicine
publications for both pfizer and moderna
i'm happy to post them at the nyscf
website
as needed so it turns out that
after 14 to 21 days off the first dose
of both physio and moderna
you get pretty reasonable levels of
protection from the virus
and i said remember after 21 to 14 days
so
it's not as if you get a vaccine and
magically you're immediately protect
protected
from the virus it takes some time for
your immune system
to respond to the vaccine once the
response is established it takes 14 to
21 days
but after 14 to 21 days you are indeed
margin more than marginally protected
against the virus and there's a risk
debate going on the in the epidemiology
community whether we should
just release all the vaccine doses that
are available
so so that we can at least get
protection
even if it's partial protection versus
whether we should follow the clinical
trial
which which would provide the full
protection as
determined by the clinical trial um
i have heard now many many times because
i've been in contact with
the administration the new incoming
administration
that they are that they are leaning
towards the
the prior category not the latter one
which is
release the doses and you know
say hail mary and
make sure that that by 28 days for
moderna 21 days for pfizer
we will get the second dose out and if
we don't get the second dose out it's a
hail mary
um i am not the biggest fan of that
approach
although i see the logic of it and i'd
love to hear what the other panelists
have to say about
you know should the better be the the
enemy of the perfect
or should we um or should we aim for
what the clinical trial originally um
was designed to
to assess which is a two dose vaccine uh
and sid can you tell us what it what was
the efficacy
that was uh that was reported so i
you know i can't tell you off the top of
my head but um by 21 days
after let's say either moderna or
uh pfizer you got up to the high 80
percent
levels um of efficacy and then the
booster of course got up to the 95
which was the reported efficacy um in
the final trial so
let's let's take a number i don't know
the the numbers on the top of my head
again they're available
um i'm happy to post the actual graphs
in the in the in the journal i spoke
directly with the
developer the cmo of pfizer i've spoken
directly
with the cmo of moderna again those
numbers are real numbers
but they're in the high 80s reaching
high 80 percent levels of protection
from the first dose again
reaching out into the 21 days now
remember
the epidemiological community and wifi
you might be able to
talk a little bit about that remember
with mmr
or with tdt or any of the other vaccines
there the booster shots aren't until one
year or six months
after the first shot this is a very
particular
very special situation in which because
of the nature of the pandemic and
because
we wanted to stack the odds um
towards success we enabled
a 21-day or 28-day booster
that is very unusual for most vaccines
it is not the
usual case for vaccines and for gareth
and others
like gareth it sets up a larger headache
because of course 21 days and 28 days is
not six months or eight months
so um so there is a brisk debate going
on right now
in the epidemiology and science
community saying
should the perfect be the enemy of the
good and if
we have limited doses available what
should we do that's one debate
and the second debate is to the should
the president use
uh president-elect um
because of the multiple errors that were
committed by the prior
administration which we hopefully will
not go into because it will take up the
entire hour
um but but but as the new administration
takes
a charge should the president-elect use
his uh authority and emergency powers
to unleash them on
the production of greater vaccine
numbers
using all authority available what i
just wrote about this
in the new york times um and thereby
supply not just the united states but
the world with uh with the vaccine so
two questions one question
is where does the epidemiological
community
and the biological immunological
biological community which i'm part of
fall on just saying let's
vaccinate as many people as possible and
and do a hail mary and say let's wait
for the 21 and 28 days
and the second question is to what
extent to the president
and the incoming vaccine task force say
um
let's go for it and let's start making
twice or three times more vaccine under
emergency use authority powers
well you know a question uh uh is
iwafa um everybody everybody who is
uh who is listening um uh to this um uh
to this conversation wants to know
when are we going to be able to get back
to normal
will we be able to get back to normal
um and i i would appreciate it if you
would speak to that a bit and
which of these strategies um do you
think
is going to um to get us
to get us there faster it's a tough
question but
a very important question i i always
think
that in order to achieve the impact the
desired impact of vaccines
you have to optimize two things
you have to optimize number one the
uptake
of the vaccine by a community by the
population
so that's really critical we need to get
very very high uptick to get the
benefits of a vaccine
and the second thing you need to
optimize is the efficacy of the vaccine
itself so ideally if we
if we had uh vaccines like the uh
pfizer buying tech and the modern
vaccines with more than nine with 95
percent efficacy
that's fantastic so here we have covered
one of those
factors the efficacy piece so now the
challenges
uptake is how do we get to very high
uptake in our
communities in our populations and
that's really what's going to determine
our ability to gain the benefits of
these vaccines
and we're in a race you know we're in a
race between increasing vaccine coverage
as quickly as possible
and raise against the spread of this
virus and then there's also the
threat of these new variants that people
are worried about
that may uh as as this virus spreads
from one individual to the next
uh of course people develop copay 19 but
even beyond that
that offers an opportunity for the
viruses to mutate to change
and the concern is that if you keep on
getting transmission
that you will have a mutation and that
mutation may be
associated with more severe disease or
may actually be able to escape
the vaccine so that's why it's really
important
to use the vaccine to our best ability
now to achieve the highest coverage
because
with 95 efficacy if we can get to
80 coverage 90 coverage of our
population
i think we would be in good shape we
would kind of
stop hopefully stop um development of
kobe 19
and hopefully be able to then go back to
normal so a lot of it is kind of i feel
our faith is in our hands you know is uh
of course we have to continue even where
people will get vaccinated it's
very very important to remind everyone
that even after you get vaccinated
you must continue to observe the current
uh
protective measures that we know the
face covering in particular the masking
and the distancing those are the
mainstay to
uh measures that we have to keep doing
and the reason for this are a couple of
things one is that we don't know yet if
these vaccines prevent
infection we know they prevent covet
disease they prevent symptomatic disease
but we don't have proof definitive proof
as of yet that they prevent infection
meaning that i could be vaccinated i
could be infected
asymptomatic i don't have any symptoms
and then if i'm not wearing a mask
and i can unknowingly transmit it to
somebody else
so we need to continue to adhere to
these measures that we've been talking
about for the past
year as religiously as possible
while at the same time doing our very
best
to increase coverage as quickly as
possible and i understand the logistical
concerns i gareth i
totally understand all the complexities
and so on um and also the nimbleness and
the adaptability and so on that's needed
to be
uh demonstrated in expanding access but
at the same time we also can't forget
the hesitancy that exists in our
population
and that means engaging communities and
community leaders community champions
and i wish i mean i somehow i wish that
we had started doing this from july i
mean we knew vaccines were coming down
the line
i i can't agree more about we we we
are late to the game we're very late to
the game and we could have started this
way back to start to engage the
communities engaged up
leaders the respected champions and
however
for i must i must interject we are where
we are
so i think we can do the postmortem when
um
you know we put the uh we put the
pandemic to rest
um you know there are so many things
that we all wish uh had happened um
but but here we have um you know gareth
representing
uh you know uh new york and the governor
that's taking a
a very very aggressive approach to
uh to trying to uh you know control this
pandemic
um i i myself go go back and forth
about uh about you know the
completing the dose not completing the
dose um i mean gareth i think
from from your perspective do you feel
um if in in the rollout as you see going
forward
um is it as uh waffle has said
making sure that we've got the
vaccination
sites in the areas where we are going to
reach populations that have been
disproportionately affected
do you think that's one of the most
effective things that that we can do i
know you've
emphasized that a lot yes and i'll just
i'll just
briefly speak a little bit about i think
as well before i answer that question
about
if you look at where the covet like the
uk was
given the situation with their hospitals
with their increasing cases was
faced with situations that is i think
it's different a little bit than what we
are facing here if you look
new york for example you know this past
week we had our lowest you know number
lowest hospital rate growth since late
october our positivity rates are coming
down
you know it's pretty clear there was a
christmas new year spike and there's
been a
plateau and a decline since then which
is great news that could
with these new strains being discovered
this could just could obviously change
very quickly the uk strain i think was
discovered in september first before
seeing what happened three months later
i think it's very important that the
genomic sequencing that's happening both
in the public health labs
private health labs we can really pay
close attention to these new strains
because that could
it could impact the decision about the
second about what to do with the second
dose
i think in terms of capacity wise new
york state does
this is not the state government but new
york state about 10 million people get
the flu vaccine over five months
every single flu season you do the math
that's 500 000 shots a week
that is we did 300 000 um
the cobit vaccine last week and then
we're talking using these massive
centers we don't use the javits to do
flu vaccines we use the pharmacies your
doctor's offices
throughput here is going to be it's
there we can we can
we can we can build it we are building
it it can happen
and it's exactly susan as you mentioned
it's both the large sites to process
tens of thousands of people
a day all over the state no vaccines on
the shelf
it's also the geographic reach going
into the communities
the churches community centers a big
priority for the state you'll see
something some announcements over the
next couple of days
on that and it's it's an
all-of-the-above approach this is a
an absolute war effort i think one thing
the governor has been saying
from the very beginning was that we need
more federal support because
the every one of these states and local
health departments and hospitals and
our existing health care infrastructure
is has been pushed to its max for the
last
eight months i mean this is we're asking
the same infrastructure to take on
a logistical and operational challenge
that is as
challenging as testing and building
emergency hospitals
and and we're asking the same people on
the same infrastructure to do it so
that's what we've been asking and this
bill that just passed congress finally
allocated more money to the states
to do this but there was i think just
like you know as
as you could argue throughout many parts
of the copic crisis there was an
enormous opportunity for the federal
government to
play a much larger role here and instead
it was
a lot of it was left to the states and
local governments which i think is uh
partly to blame for what you know you've
seen in the last couple of weeks
nationwide in terms of
in terms of the number of doses that are
going into arms yeah
no and basically and the
bulk of the and the bulk of the
work was done by nursing staff
and by doctors so um i i think i would
not be remiss
in declaring 2021 the year of the nurses
absolutely um because while we
sheltered in our homes they came out
every day
um and took care of patients
and are now coming out every day and
vaccinating people
um so anyway
absolutely uh and i'm very excited about
the uh the core
of uh you know a thousand uh public
health workers
uh i mean perhaps this will begin we
will begin to see
infrastructure we have we have crumbling
uh health we have crumbling bridges we
have crumbling
uh tunnels um and uh
you know as uh as the governor just uh
um
opened uh this incredible train station
uh moynihan station
for the you know that has been you know
30 years in conversation
um that uh you know hopefully this will
be uh a time where we can maybe it's
taken this pandemic
uh but you know with the incoming
administration to do something about it
um uh we have a lot of questions coming
in i've tried to
incorporate um as many as many as i
could
but i think one is very very important
we've made this point
in this conversation but uh i i
am worried i don't want people to think
that they get
vaccinated and it's a get out of jail
free card
and they can rip off their masks and fly
where they want
um so i think we don't want to create
you know
you get right exactly you get vaccinated
well mine's not in my pocket but
you you get vaccinated and um you know
and and you become an asymptomatic super
spreader
so we must continue i mean you know
waffle you're
the uh you know the the epidemiologist
but
i mean i believe that we you get
vaccinated
you know sid you get your your second
shot tomorrow but
you're still with your mask you're still
not eating indoors
uh you know with so i think it's
important to
to state that and the other question
which
[Music]
because we don't know i think we can say
unequivocally
right now we don't know after you're
vaccinated
if you are still able to transmit the
disease right
we still don't know if the vaccine
prevents you from getting infected
and therefore potentially could transmit
the disease correct
um yeah although very early data from
israel would suggest that you
that the transmission decreases i would
emphasize it's very early data
it's not been published yet um but very
early data from israel
would would be in the positive direction
um
i would also emphasize that the b111
strain
c which is the strain that's uh
maybe 70 percent of london um is
uh probably vaccine sensitive
which means that it will be prevented by
the vaccine
um the e-6 strain which is from south
africa
and in brazil is still in evaluation
um so the good the bad news is that the
b117 strain
which we um have in the united states
um has a lot has a greater level of
infectivity
um but doesn't seem to cause worse
disease
that's the good news it was bad news and
good news
um the e six
uh strain uh from south africa
and from brazil may be less sensitive to
the vaccine
although we don't know that yet for sure
and that is something that's a question
that we're finding out so
all of these reasons number one is
the the fact that although early data
from south africa
sorry from from israel suggests that
there is less transmission
um number two that there are at least
two strains that are
now moving through the population as
they will even inevitably
because of viral evolution there are two
strains that are moving to the through
the population
that have a higher level of infectivity
and another one potentially a
possibility of vaccine resistant
we are not going to ask people to stop
masking
and using social distancing in the near
future
at least until we see the curves of
mortality and infectivity change in the
united states and i think that's a fair
statement of
gareth um i just want to turn to the
children
um we we have children
not in school it's absolutely terrible
uh thank goodness their teachers
hopefully will
uh take the opportunity to to get
vaccinated
um i understand that uh i believe it's
i forget which one of the um the
companies is now doing trials
on kids six to twelve um
so far uh it looks as though the
children are getting infected at lower
levels
um but the vicious cycle of
uh you know parents not being able to
work
um the daycare centers and the uh and
the schools
are a critical part of that and um
the uh the children and parents that are
are really suffering
terribly and i know that a huge um
a huge effort on the part of the state
is to try to get
uh get kids back in school um
do do we think this is something that
you know
in a world where all the teachers are
are vaccinated but the children cannot
yet be vaccinated
do we think that uh we're going to be
able to return our children to school
uh you know when when september comes i
mean it's
what you think i actually think we have
some reassuring news in terms of schools
and particularly for the younger age
schools um
uh children and there's been a lot of
evidence uh some evidence from
uh from the u.s and evidence from other
countries as well
is that demonstrates that um actually
transmission within schools is quite low
and the transmission from children to
adults is quite low as well
so that's reassuring and i think if you
look at
even some of the data based on the
testing that's been going on in schools
in here and elsewhere is that often
these infections
that have been identified have been
identified from transmission
in the community rather than
transmission in the school
so i think if we can um while we're
waiting for results
on the safety of these vaccines in
children and these studies are only
looking at safety they're
not powered to look at efficacy while
we're waiting for these safety studies
which are not going to be long studies
they're going to be short-term studies
is that i think vaccinating as many of
the school not just the teachers but
also the staff in the schools all the
people that work in this course
is important is a very important
priority and that's what's going on
now as new york state has prioritized
any staff including teachers working at
schools
cafeteria workers and janitors and so
forth okay
can i add one more thing to that which
is that you know
um there are this is me speaking as a
virologist and
and an immunologist um not
as an epidemiologist i do
think that it would be it's for the
economy and for the welfare
of many many people of course it's
important to get people back into
schools
the virus has disproportionately
affected
some communities it has
disproportionately perfected
african-americans latinx communities and
it has disproportionately affected women
i mean the new york times has has a
recent article
which shows how how how much the
disproportionality is
of the 156 if you take 156
000 jobs that were recovered post
this virus um 140
or 142 000 of them are of men
and 16 000 of them are women so it is a
tenfold discrepancy give or take between
the return of women to the workplace
versus the return of men to the
workplace
so i appreciate all of these efforts
two points to make number one is that in
general
other coronaviruses of which cyrus grove
do as one
do not and we haven't looked so deeply
because we haven't looked
but do not seem to show long-term
effects in
in children they suffer common cold
they get back and they're fine but we
don't know because we haven't looked
because we haven't compared
number two is is this coronavirus
special
in other words could we be ignoring
something about asymptomatic uh
infection in children that we should
that
would be worrisome and so i would the
in the next few months weeks days i
would
encourage immunologists and
virologists pathologists etc to explore
that question very deeply
so that we can be reassured that even if
children were infected
and suffered an asymptomatic infection
as you know the mortality rate in
children
is vanishingly small very very very
small
so even if children are infected
if we can be reassured based on
pathological and
other criteria that even if they were
infected much like other coronary
viruses
this is a common cold it affects you
know the virus
infects the heart the virus infects
other parts of the body so there it's
not it's not
a trivial matter but the children clear
it
and the children move on as children do
it would be
very very reassuring then to
vaccinate the teaching population
which is much more at risk and move on
open schools and thereby
allow people uh mothers especially with
masks
to return to work um this is a big task
and i would this is a kind of task
that the vaccine task force and the
national institutes of health could take
up
it is a task that involves
epidemiologists
and immunologists and biologists and
pathologists
but this is what this is the kind of
things that the united states
actually does quite well and
pediatricians i think that um that's
going to be the topic for uh
for our next panel um i'm afraid that uh
that we we've come
we've come to be to the end of our time
um
but uh i actually uh i have i have one
question
which is something that has bothered me
from the very beginning
uh i know gareth it's something that
you've been uh
involved in which is um can we
have a test that is a simple
saliva test that is very cheap
is a few sense that every day we can
check our
own status and we know whether
we're safe to go do whatever activities
uh we're going to do or not you know can
i
can i give my my grandson a hug
can i go to uh to my workplace
can i see my friend for lunch what
when will we have that we we know of
a number of efforts sherlock and others
to do this but that just seems the way
we can
test our our blood sugar with a with a
test strip
uh you know pregnancy with a little bit
of urine
um and there you are when will we
have a test and is this something that
uh that is
is part of the tool kit that you you
envision
um you know as you're opening hospitals
closing hospitals opening vaccination
science opening testing centers etc
i think that's absolutely right i think
also as the vaccine rolls out as we
think about reopening the economy even
with the virus here we actually
you know my personal opinion not
speaking as representative of new york
state is that we have to
rethink how we as a society think about
testing
less as a tool to say yes i am negative
or yes i am positive i mean most of the
testing that happens in the country
right now is pcr
lab-based testing where you could get
tested at 9 45 in the morning your
samples
off to the lab and run the next day you
could you could be infected 15 minutes
later so
i think to reconsider there's a lot of
extraordinarily cheap point-of-care
antigen testing on the market
that has extraordinary limitations when
it comes to
uh all sorts of health purposes
but the beauty is that it's cheap it can
be done without having to be sent to a
lab
rapid result you will have to account
for false positives you want to account
for false
negatives but if we rethink testing less
as a
uh i have sniffles i got to figure out
if this is coveted or not but more as a
broad routine screening tool where you
know you're gonna miss some but by the
mass quantity that's being done
you're actually probably gonna catch
more cases than you are currently
catching now
we can rethink the way we approach it i
think it we could testing and this is
what i know professor michael mina
has been the you know hammering the
op-ed pages on for i think since the
beginning of the
of the pandemic this is a i think a real
way
that you could use testing to completely
reopen the economy fully open schools
uh even before full vaccination rates
have been reached
well and perhaps we also will find with
this masking that we have uh
lower overall uh respiratory and uh
mgi uh uh bugs as well
so i i would like to um in closing just
uh
ask um uh you and uh we can begin with
you gareth since we're
uh since we're in conversation right now
um
uh anything that you would like to uh to
let uh
people know we have uh many participants
on this uh
no absolutely and i want to i'm just
going to start by saying you know i've
seen some of the chats that come in i'm
everyone
in that 7.1 million population that's
looking for the vaccine
uh i get it it is there's going to be a
couple of weeks where it's going to be
frustrating in terms of getting
appointments and lining up
the shots uh you know there's their
sites have been booked out through april
already
and i just would just ask for patience
uh
we went from 2.1 million people eligible
to 7.1 million people eligible in a
matter of 48 hours
and so to the extent that these vaccines
are coming
they're not going to be any left on the
shelf at the end of the week and they're
going to be getting into arms
and the moment that we can we can get
more vaccines out there
when more supply comes in we certainly
will just i would ask for patients if i
understand the frustration
you know my mom i think those who
doesn't um
even have a cell phone you know spent
hours of frustrated time trying to find
out how to schedule
um so i i i get it completely i would
ask
i would ask for for patients um but in
overall
susan i want to thank you for for
setting up this panel and everyone for
joining us
and i hope it was informative and i
really enjoyed being part of this
thank you wafa any closing thoughts
yeah i mean i think um in in many ways i
i totally understand and appreciate the
frustration i think people are a bit
exhausted
from all the what we've been going
through but i always tell everybody
please this is not the time to
let down your guard i think most
importantly we do have tools in our at
our fingertips and i call them the
non-pharmaceutical vaccines
we actually know that masks and
distancing
works really well again and again it
works really well
so let's as we're waiting to get access
to the vaccine and hopefully
that access will increase incrementally
over the next several days and weeks
is not to let down your guard and hold
on to the then our non-pharmaceutical
vaccine for now
said was it three words while i will
hold up my mask
patience science
april
well thank you everyone thank you
everyone who joined uh
and uh everyone be safe we're your mask
uh and uh you know be patient and
you know keep keep refreshing to look
for your appointments as you become
uh eligible thank you so much thank you
good night